Torsion Angle Class                                                   {#torsion}
===================

\warning Energies computed by ForcemanII for the improper
torsional energetic components may differ from those of other programs.  This is
because the improper torsion angle is ill-defined and its value usually depends
on the order the atoms are input.  We aim for a value that is independent of
such conventions and instead use the average of all possible ways of computing
the angle.  See the improper torsion angle section below for more details.

# Torsion

Assume that atom 1 is bonded to atom 2; atom 2 is bonded to atom3, and atom 3 is
bonded to atom 4.  If we look down the 2-3 bond the 1-2 and 2-3 bonds will make
an angle.  This angle is the torsion angle.  Mathematically this can be viewed
as the angle between plane comprised of atoms 1,2, and 3 and the plane comprised
of the atoms 2,3,4.  Let \f$\vec{r_{21}}\f$ be a vector
parallel to the 1-2 bond pointing from atom 2 to atom 1, \f$\vec{r_{23}}\f$ be a
vector parallel to the 2-3 bond pointing from atom 2 to atom 3, and 
\f$\vec{r_{34}}\f$ be a vector parallel to the 3-4 bond pointing from atom 3 to
atom 4.  \f$\vec{n_1}=\vec{r_{21}}\times\vec{r_{23}}\f$ is a vector normal to 
the plane containing atoms 1, 2, and 3 and 
\f$\vec{n_2}=\vec{r_{34}}\times\vec{r_{23}}\f$
is a vector normal to the plane containing atoms 2, 3, and 4.  The dihedral
angle, \f$\phi\f$ is then given by:
\f[
\cos\theta=\frac{\vec{n_1}\cdot\vec{n_2}}{n_1 n_2}.
\f]
Alternatively:
\f[
\vec{n_1}\times\vec{n_2}=\frac{n_1 n_2\sin\theta \vec{n_3}}{n_3}
\f]
where \f$\vec{n_3}\f$ is a unit vector perpindicular to \f$\vec{n_1}\f$ and 
\f$\vec{n_2}\f$ and with direction consistent with the right-hand rule.  Since,
both of our cross products involved \f$\vec{r_{23}}\f$, we know that 
\f$\vec{n_3}=\frac{\vec{r_{23}}}{r_{23}}\f$.  Given
that \f$\vec{n_3}\f$ is a unit vector we may multiply both sides of 
the previous equation from the right by it to get:
\f[
\sin\theta=\frac{\left(\vec{n_1}\times\vec{n_2}\right)\cdot\vec{r_{23}}}
                {n_1 n_2 r_{23}}
\f]
Using the fact that \f$\tan\theta=\frac{\sin\theta}{\cos\theta}\f$ we also have
\f[
\tan\theta=\frac{\left(\vec{n_1}\times\vec{n_2}\right)\cdot\vec{r_{23}}}
{r_{23}}
\f]

As far as symmetries of the torsion angle are concerned, we have one degree of
freedom, we can read the sequence forward or backward.  Presently, we choose
to read the sequence in which ever manner makes atoms 2 and atoms 3 show up
in number order (order in input).  Parameters for torsions are expected to be
given in an analogous manner (atom type 2 should be less then atom type 3).

## Improper Torsion

Related to the torsion angle, the improper torsion angle measures the planarity
around an sp\f$^2\f$ hybridized atom.  Instead of being a non-branching path
i.e. 1 is connected to 2, which is connected to 3, which is connected to 4, the
atoms in an improper torsion are all bonded to atom 2.  It should be noted that
there are other conventions for which atom the central atom is (usually that it
is atom 3), but we choose it to be atom 2 as this is naturally where it falls
when looping over connectivity.  This all seems well and good, but now let's
show you why this term is miserable (if an expert out there wants to enlighten
me on this issue, please contact me, I desperately would like some
clarification).

To do this note a few properties of the improper dihedral angle.  Assume
for a quadruple of atoms \$\lbrace a_1,a_2,a_3,a_4\rbrace\f$, we always compute 
our dihedral angle as the angle between the planes formed from the
first three atoms, \f$a_1, a_2, a_3\f$,  and the last three atoms,
\f$a_2, a_3, a_4\f$.
To make this more concrete consider the following example.  Our atoms are
located at:
~~~
a1 -43.602241118157544, -24.33802667670957, 1.848596102849415
a2 -41.92308162693384, -25.865577231287773, 0.23207724870909
a3 -42.76485062010395, -26.397217623225124, -1.864641766222014
a4 -39.789193591525105, -26.335512400506307, 1.1409900959943542
~~~

By considering all six permutations of the orbital atoms we generate the
following improper torsional angles:

| Permuation | Angle Value (radians) |
|------------|-----------------------|
| 1,2,3,4    | -3.0739165910027615   |
| 3,2,1,4    | 3.0833170468335953    |
| 3,2,4,1    | 3.0739165910027615    |
| 1,2,4,3    | -3.0833170468335958   |
| 4,2,1,3    | 3.073975669189943     |
| 4,2,3,1    | -3.073975669189943    |

As you can see (up to a sign) there are three unique angles that can be
generated by permuting the definitions of what atom is 1, 3, and 4.
By only considering one set of cyclic permutations we can always ensure we get
angles with the same sign.

This convention assumes that center atom is second.  If we compute the angles
in the same manner (dihedral between the first three and second three atoms),
but switch the center atom to atom 3 we get the same angles, but with opposite
sign (this makes sense we have just flipped the definition of which plane is
first).  This is the convention used by Tinker and because cosine is an even
function the difference in sign does not matter for a Fourier series expansion.
The CHARMM force field makes the convention that the central atom is listed
first (or last at the cost of a sign caused be changing the definition of which
plane is first).  Using the same atoms, let's see what happens when the central
atom is now listed first:

| Permuation | Angle Value (radians) |
|------------|-----------------------|
| 2,1,3,4    | 0.03356224876458078   |
| 2,3,1,4    | -0.03356224876458085  |
| 2,3,4,1    | 0.04481843274914807   |
| 2,1,4,3    | -0.03315167722736386  |
| 2,4,1,3    | 0.03315167722736379   |
| 2,4,3,1    | -0.044818432749148006 |

Again we end up with three unique angles (up to a sign), with the same sign
being given by permutations that are cyclically related.  So far so good,
unfortunately, there is not an easy relation between these three unique angles
and the three unique angle given by our (or Tinker's) conventions.  More
specifically they are not just related by a rotation of \f$\pm\pi\f$ (this would
have made sense as the zero of energy for the first set of angles is \f$\pi\f$
and is 0 for the second set.  As this ordering seems unique to
CHARMM we have chooosen to reorder all CHARMM improper torsions and change their
equilibrium distances from 0 radians to \f$\pi\f$ radians.  Now we are at least
computing the same set of angles, regardless of the force field.

We still have the conundrum of how to uniquely pick which of the three angles we
declare "the improper torsion angle".  After a long search, from what I can
tell, the "standard" (I have no idea how many packages actually abide by this)
way to ensure one always uses the same improper torsion is given on
[this website](http://chempedia.info/info/165388/).  Basically they
suggest that the order of the orbtial atoms is that of their input to the
program and the central atom is given third for all force fields that are not
CHARMM, and first for CHARMM (again, our code requests that the central atom is
given second regardless of the force field).  This means simply reordering the
atoms in the input file changes the value of the angle, which in my opinion is
unacceptable.

Since I'm trying to compare to Tinker, let's consider their convention.  Well
short answer is I can't seem to find it.  Based on Tinker's CHARMM22 parameter
file we can gain some insight.  To this end, consider the improper torsion made
among the CHARMM22 classes: 6, 20, 29, and 30 (listed in our order).  These map
to H, C, N, N. This angle should be symmetric about the H-C bond.  The comment
in the file suggests that CHARMM's parameters are defined such that both the
angle: 6, 20, 29, 30 and the angle: 6, 20, 30, 29 would be computed in the
CHARMM package (and the energetic contributions from both would be included).
Note that CHARMM's ordering of parameters makes the minimum energy at 0 radians
so the harmonic description is insensitive to the sign change engendered by this
case.  Tinker apparently computes this angle once (making matters more
complicated it appears to be for the 30, 20, 29, 6 value) so they
decide to double the force constant because they will be dividing by 2 in the
actual energy expression they have coded up.  From this I assume that CHARMM
assures angles that should be symmetric, are symmetric by averaging the two
angles that should be symmetric (it is conceivable this is then averaged with
the remaining unique angle and/or that for other angles all three values are
averaged together, but I can not infer that from this).  Tinker on the other
hand, computes the value once (and then conceivably averages this value with
that of the other unique angle).

Punchline is there appears to be no real convention, so I'm going to do whatever
I want.  In particular, I am going to take the easiest solution to this
problem I can see.  We know that we get in general three unique angles depending
on the order, but how much do they really differ from one another?  By taking
the improper angles in ubiquitin as a test set, I have computed the standard
deviation in the magnitude of the improper torsion resulting from the three
cyclic permuations of each improper torsion angle. The result is, that on
average, these permutations can change the angle by about \f$\pm 0.25\f$
degrees.  To me this suggests that the angles are basically interchangable and
the average of the three angles should serve as a good value of "the improper
torsion angle".  Moreover, the derivative of the average is straightforward as
it is just the average of the derivatives.
